README.md, before:

# Don't Panic
Hello There!

You've found a guide for learning about all the stuff needed to either program or reason about data oriented
and real time systems. It will help you with things like what memory allocations are, why computational graphs
used to program neural networks are a good idea, different concepts in parallelization of code, what types are,
how to profile and optimize code and how to create real-time systems. All running on your laptop!

The guide is meant to be followed several times, with every increase in level the curriculum expands and it is
assumed that you have learned and understood the previously introduced concepts. It's done this way, because
computer science is a bit hard. To learn more stuff, you have to know some stuff, about some stuff, but to learn
more, you have to know a lot of stuff about a lot of stuff.
Which section is part of which level is indicated by an emoji, like so 2️⃣.

To make things more complicated, because everyone loves complicated, there are some sections which are meant to
tailor to you, the reader! These specialization sections could for example have one set of tasks for people
interested in compute graphics and a different set of tasks for people interested in deep learning.
These sections are indicated by this DNA emoji - 🧬.

A course based on this material can be found
[here](https://absorensen.github.io/real-time-visual-and-machine-learning-systems/).

The material comprising the guide is divided into 7 modules.

* Intro to the course, the different ways to use the material, intro to Rust and wgpu.
* Memory hierarchies and computational graphs
* Concurrency
* Types, energy usage, bit tricks and compression
* How to create real time systems and additional components to use for your own projects
* Optimization with an introduction to profiling
* Project ideas for trying out the various tools you have learned throughout the material

So let's get started!

🌌 Queue Eric Idle singing while wearing a white wig 🌌

Commit message:

Remove the last remnants of levels, some cleanup and some extra sentences about shared memory.

README.md, after:

# Don't Panic
Hello There!

You've found a guide for learning about all the stuff needed to either program or reason about data oriented
and real time systems. It will help you with things like what memory allocations are, why using computational graphs
to program neural networks are a good idea, different concepts in parallelization of code, what types are,
how to profile and optimize code and how to create real-time systems. All running on your laptop!

To make things more complicated, because everyone loves complicated, there are some sections which are meant to
tailor to you, the reader! These specialization sections could for example have one set of tasks for people
interested in compute graphics and a different set of tasks for people interested in deep learning.
These sections are indicated by this DNA emoji - 🧬. You will find additional sections marked with 👨🏼‍💻.
These sections are meant as exercises or hand-ins for a course or if you want to explore the concepts
in practice.

A course based on this material can be found
[here][0].

The material comprising the guide is divided into 7 modules.

* Intro to the course, Rust and wgpu.
* Memory hierarchies and computational graphs
* Concurrency
* Types, energy usage, bit tricks and compression
* Aspects of real time systems and additional components to use for your own projects
* Optimization with tips on profiling
* Project ideas for trying out the various tools you have learned throughout the material

So let's get started!

🌌 Queue Eric Idle singing while wearing a white wig 🌌

[0]: https://absorensen.github.io/real-time-visual-and-machine-learning-systems/
